Document the workflow results script (#503)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: docs/getting-started/accessing-resources/getting-access-to-data.md

To participate in the OpenScPCA Project, you will need access to the Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas (ScPCA) data.
Here, we describe several ways to access data.

Broadly speaking, there are three kinds of data you might wish to work with:

- Data from the ScPCA Portal
    - You can find out more about the contents of files and how they were processed from the ScPCA documentation: <https://scpca.readthedocs.io>
- Simulated data for testing and/or developing modules

> - Results from completed OpenScPCA analysis modules

Author: > This strikes me as a bit of an odd list.

It struck me as a bit of an odd list while I was writing it too, so was indeed hoping for just this sort of feedback 😄

The [`download-data.py` script](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/blob/main/download-data.py) is designed to download files from whatever release you specify to a folder named for the date of that release and [symlink](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbolic_link) it to `data/current`.

!!! tip "Log into AWS CLI before running the script"
    Before running this script locally, you will need to be [logged into your AWS CLI profile](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#logging-in-to-a-new-session).
    To do this, run the following commands in terminal before running the `data-download.py` script, and follow instructions to log in.

    ```sh
    # replace `openscpca` with your AWS CLI profile name if it differs
    export AWS_PROFILE=openscpca
    aws sso login
    ```

    The command `export AWS_PROFILE=openscpca` will define your AWS profile name as `openscpca` for the duration of your terminal session.
    Defining this variable is helpful because the `download-data.py` script also needs your profile name to download data from S3.

>     Note that you can also [add this profile definition to your shell profile file](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#storing-your-aws-profile-name) so that it will always be defined in any terminal session.

Author: > though maybe this only needs to appear in the linked doc?

went with this

To switch back to using ScPCA data, rerun the script with the `--release current` option.
If you already have the most recent data, this will not repeat downloading the data you already have.

## Accessing ScPCA module results

> Once an analysis modules matures, the Data Lab ports the analysis to a separate repository called [`OpenScPCA-nf`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-nf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an analysis modules matures, the Data Lab will port the analysis to a separate repository called [`OpenScPCA-nf`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-nf).
```

> This repository holds a [Nextflow workflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) to reproducibility run and generate results from completed analysis modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository holds a [Nextflow workflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) to reproducibly run and generate results from completed analysis modules.
```

> If you wish to use output from a completed analysis module in your module, you will need to obtain the results generated by this workflow.

Reviewer: I do think we want to say something about using results from other modules that are _not_ in the workflow yet. I'm not sure we have a specific rec here, but it is something we should address. Essential, I expect an FAQ of "What if the results I want to use are from a module that isn't in the workflow yet?"

Author: fyi https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/issues/515

> We have provided a [`download-results.py` script](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/blob/main/download-results.py) that you can use to download all results from a module that has been run in `OpenScPCA-nf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have provided a [`download-results.py` script](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/blob/main/download-results.py) that you can use to download results from a module that has been run in `OpenScPCA-nf`.
```

> Results are available at specific tagged releases. <!-- STUB_LINK to openscpca-nf docs -->

Reviewer: The results bucket is organized by data release, not workflow release, so I think the tagging comment here is potentially confusing?

Author: I just went ahead and removed it.

We briefly cover some of the most common use cases below, but we encourage you to review all the options available to you.

You can list all the options for `download-results.py` by running the following from the root directory of the repository:

```sh
./download-results.py --help
```

!!! tip "No `--profile` necessary on Lightsail for Research"

>     Omit `--profile openscpca` from the commands below if you're using Lightsail for Research.

Reviewer: I think we should also tell people they can leave this off if they have set the `AWS_PROFILE` environment variable.

Author: Huh, turns out we never actually mention this! I'm going to go ahead and add an admonition about this to the AWS CLI docs, as well as mention it here.

> Example script usage below assumes you have created a profile called `openscpca` when [configuring the AWS CLI](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md).

Reviewer: We should note that before running these scripts they will also need to run `aws sso login --profile openscpca` (If we don't say that for the data download script, we should add it there too).

Reviewer: For easier typing, I wonder if we should tell people to run the following commands to start:
```
export AWS_PROFILE=openscpca
aws sso login
```
and then leave off the `--profile` option in all of the examples.

Author: Just seeing these comments after pushing this (of course) https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/pull/503/commits/d21aa10dc2058653d3c8117babb79ab252e924e0

I think it's good to keep the docs I added, but I agree with your suggestion here so will nix the admonitions in favor of a small section at the top "before running any script"

If you wish to only working with a subset of a module's results, you can use the `--projects` or `--samples` options to download select samples (note: these options are mutually exclusive).
Note that whether this subsetting is possible will depend on whether that module's results have been structured in a manner that reflects this organization. PHRASING HELP PLEASE!

#### Download result data structure

By default, results will download into the `data` directory in your local copy of the `OpenScPCA-analysis` repository, but this can be customized with the `--data-dir` option.

Result downloads will generally follow this structure:

```sh
data
├── {Release}
│       └── results
│          └── {Module name}
│              └── {Result files}
└── current -> {Release}
```

Both result files and ScPCA data files follow the same release schedule.
Therefore, if you have downloaded both data and workflow results, all files will be present in the `data` directory with this overall structure:

```sh
data
├── {Release}
│       ├── {Project ID}
│       │   └── {Sample ID}
│       │       └── {Library files}
│       ├── bulk_metadata.tsv (if applicable)
│       ├── bulk_quant.tsv (if applicable)

> │       ├── single_cell_metadata.tsv

Reviewer: The bulk and metadata should be nested under Project ID. Noting this is incorrect in the data download description as well.

Author: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/pull/503/commits/efe5cd4f7dea45e38dc0409a3b4c2fa628390875

|       └── results
|           └── {Module name}
│              └── {Result files}
└── current -> {Release}
```

To list all available releases, you can use the following command from the root of the repository:

```sh
./download-results.py --list-releases
```

> The release directory is symlinked to `data/current`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `data/current` directory is symlinked to the current release directory
.
```

The release directory is symlinked to `data/current`.
This is generally the path you should use in your code.

## Accessing ScPCA module results

As an analysis modules matures, the Data Lab will port the analysis to a separate repository called [`OpenScPCA-nf`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-nf).
This repository holds a [Nextflow workflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) to reproducibly run and generate results from completed analysis modules.

> If you wish to use output from a completed analysis module in your module, you will need to obtain the results generated by this workflow.

Reviewer: Again, removing the "completed" that I don't like.
```suggestion
If you wish to use output from an `OpenScPCA-nf` analysis module in your module, you will need to obtain the results generated by the workflow.
```

You can list all the options for `download-results.py` by running the following from the root directory of the repository:

```sh
./download-results.py --help
```

!!! tip "Log into AWS CLI before running the script"
    Before running this script locally, you will need to be [logged into your AWS CLI profile](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#logging-in-to-a-new-session).
    To do this, run the following commands in terminal before running the `results-download.py` script, and follow instructions to log in.

    ```sh
    # replace `openscpca` with your AWS CLI profile name if it differs
    export AWS_PROFILE=openscpca
    aws sso login
    ```

    The command `export AWS_PROFILE=openscpca` will define your AWS profile name as `openscpca` for the duration of your terminal session.
    Defining this variable is helpful because the `download-data.py` script also needs your profile name to download data from S3.

    Note that you can also [add this profile definition to your shell profile file](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md#storing-your-aws-profile-name) so that it will always be defined in any terminal session.

> Example script usage below assumes you have created a profile called `openscpca` when [configuring the AWS CLI](../../technical-setup/environment-setup/configure-aws-cli.md).

Reviewer: I assume this line should be deleted as the tip replaces it?
```suggestion
```

> To download all results for one or more modules, use the `--modules` option as follows:

Reviewer: Since later we will say how to avoid all, let's just leave this a bit ambiguous?
```suggestion
To download results for one or more modules, use the `--modules` option as follows:
```

```sh
# Get results from a single module
./download-results.py --modules module-name

# Get results from several modules
./download-results.py --modules first-module,second-module
```

To list all available modules for which you can download results, you can use the `--list-modules` option as follows.
This will list all modules available in, by default, the current release:

```sh
./download-results.py --list-modules
```

> To review what result files would be downloaded without performing the download yet, you can use the `--dryrun` option as follows:

Reviewer: Can't review if you haven't viewed?
```suggestion
To see the result files that would be downloaded without performing the download yet, you can use the `--dryrun` option as follows:
```

```sh
./download-results.py --modules module-name --dryrun
```

While the structure of results files varies by module, some modules' results will be organized by project and/or sample.
For those modules, you can use either the `--projects` or `--samples` flag (noting that these options are mutually exclusive) to download results specific to one or more projects or samples:

```sh
# use the --projects option
./download-results.py --modules module-name --dryrun --projects SCPCPXXXXXX

# use the --samples option
./download-results.py --modules module-name --dryrun --samples SCPCSXXXXXX,SCPCSXXXXXY
```

#### Download result data structure

> By default, results will download into the `data` directory in your local copy of the `OpenScPCA-analysis` repository, but this can be customized with the `--data-dir` option.

Reviewer: I don't know if we want to call out this customization... just that using a different location will likely break scripts.

Result downloads will generally follow this structure:

```sh
data
├── {Release}
│       └── results
│          └── {Module name}
│              └── {Result files}
└── current -> {Release}
```

Both result files and ScPCA data files follow the same release schedule.
Therefore, if you have downloaded both data and workflow results, all files will be present in the `data` directory with this overall structure:

```sh
data
├── {Release}
│       ├── {Project ID}
│       │   └── {Sample ID}
│       │   │     └── {Library files}
│       │   ├── bulk_metadata.tsv (if applicable)

> │       │   └── bulk_quant.tsv (if applicable)
> │       ├── single_cell_metadata.tsv

Reviewer: This one was easier to suggest the fix for...
```suggestion
│       │   ├── bulk_quant.tsv (if applicable)
│       │   └── single_cell_metadata.tsv
```

Results will download into the `data` directory in your local copy of the `OpenScPCA-analysis` repository.
Result downloads will generally follow this structure:

```sh
data
├── {Release}
│       └── results
│          └── {Module name}
│              └── {Result files}
└── current -> {Release}
```

Both result files and ScPCA data files follow the same release schedule.
Therefore, if you have downloaded both data and workflow results, all files will be present in the `data` directory with this overall structure:

```sh
data
├── {Release}
│       ├── {Project ID}
│       │   └── {Sample ID}
│       │   │     └── {Library files}
│       │   ├── bulk_metadata.tsv (if applicable)
│       │   ├── bulk_quant.tsv (if applicable)
│       │   └── single_cell_metadata.tsv
|       └── results
|           └── {Module name}
│              └── {Result files}
└── current -> {Release}
```

To list all available releases, you can use the following command from the root of the repository:

```sh
./download-results.py --list-releases
```

The `data/current` directory is symlinked to the current release directory
.
This is generally the path you should use in your code.

## Accessing test data

> The test data are simulated or permuted data files with the same structure as the real project data, and are generally much smaller than the original data (learn more at the [`simulate-sce`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/tree/main/analyses/simulate-sce) module).

Reviewer: I think worth adding a sentence to say that these data are used during automated testing of modules.

Author: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/pull/503/commits/eedad84e8994f9ba66af6c236fadeed9f815d248

.
This is generally the path you should use in your code.

## Accessing test data

The test data are simulated or permuted data files with the same structure as the real project data, and are generally much smaller than the original data (learn more at the [`simulate-sce`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/tree/main/analyses/simulate-sce) module).
These files are also used during automated testing of analysis modules. <!-- STUB_LINK for module GHAs -->

You can use the [download data script](#using-the-download-data-script) to download the test data for the project by using the `--test-data` option.
Similarly, you use the [download result script](#accessing-scpca-module-results) to download ScPCA results from running completed modules on the test data by using the `--test-data` option.

You do not need an AWS account set up to download the test data or results.

To download test data with all other options set at default, run the following from the root of the repository:

```sh
./download-data.py --test-data
```

To download a given module's results as generated with the test data, run the following from the root of the repository:

```sh

> ./download-results.py --test-data

Reviewer: module is required here too (I think)
```suggestion
./download-results.py --modules module-name --test-data
```

```

These commands will download either test data or results, respectively, and will update the `data/current` symlink to instead point to the `data/test` directory.
This means any real ScPCA data or results you had previously downloaded will no longer be in the `data/current` path.
To switch this symlink path back to ScPCA data or results, rerun either script with the `--release current` option:

```sh
./download-data.py --release current

./download-results.py --release current

> ```

Reviewer: I'm realizing this may behave badly with the current scripts, as it could result in unexpected downloads. We should probably add a `--use-release` option or something like that which only updates the symlink.

Alternatively, we could start by adding a warning that you would _not_ want to run the scripts as shown here (which I think was why we did not have an example), but you should run it with a project, module, etc. that you already have to avoid re-downloading data. 

Note also that because results are nested within releases, you only need to run _one_ of these, not both. You say `either` above, but show both, which I think could be misinterpreted.

Author: In the interest of this PR not going on forever, can I open this as a separate issue as part of this Epic?

Reviewer: Only if you remove this example code.

Author: I commented it out here with a note, now will file issue.
https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/pull/503/commits/4b811436effe649ae761d9a6d8c1e940d766adf9

Author: Issue: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis/issues/523
